ansible/Readme.md, before:

## Deploy

The target server has to:
- be running Ubuntu 20.04
- have Docker installed
- be present in `inventory.yml`

To deploy for the first time, run:
```sh
ansible/deploy.sh dev
```
where `dev` is the name of the host in inventory.

> Note: the scripts and playbooks were designed for a single host only. Using a pattern like `dev,stg` will probably fail. (It's possible to implement a check with `ansible_play_hosts|length`)

For faster deployments after the first one, you may use:
```sh
ansible/update.sh dev
```

Containers will be recreated if their image is updated, or "when their configuration differs from the service definition". So if there have been changes to .env files, or bind-mounted configuration files, run `deploy/update.sh -r ...` to load changes.

To upgrade unversioned dependencies, for example apt packages, instead of running _update && upgrade_ inside the container, rebuild the images ignoring cache, by running `update.sh` with `-c`.

## Database backups

The database is automatically backed up by update.sh/deploy.sh when `git pull` changes commit.

> Warning: if `git pull` changed commit, and then the backup fails because of misconfiguration, the next attempt to update.sh will not back up because there will be no commit change.

You can manually backup with
```sh
ansible/backup-db.sh dev
```
where `dev` is the name of the host in inventory.

## Importing the DB of a server

```sh
ansible/import-db.sh stg
```
where `stg` is the name of the host in inventory.

This will create a new dump in the server, then download and restore it.

You can also append the file name of the dump, for example:
```sh
ansible/import-db.sh stg stg-2022-02-18_17-10-00.dump
```
which won't create a new dump, and just download the existing one if it's not present in your computer, and then restore it. This makes the process faster and more reproducible, as developers can work on the same dump by running the same `import-db` command.

## External database

Create the database instance before running deploy. The database (as in `database-name`) has to be manually created.

  - AWS RDS: At the _Create database_ wizard, under _Additional configuration_ specify _Initial database name_.

  - DigitalOcean databases: After it's created, instead of using the `defaultdb`, go to the _Users & Databases_ tab in the resource page, and create another one with a better name.

    **Also create a `postgres` DB**, else `dropdb`/`createdb` will fail. (This is because DO doesn't give us the password for the postgres user, which is the owner of the template0/1 databases. However a `postgres` database solves this.)

The `postgres` container in docker-compose.yml has to be kept. It has a custom entrypoint to avoid running another postgres server and creating another database in this case. With its env vars, commands like `pg_dump` automatically target the remote DB.

So you can run queries on this remote DB running this command from server:
```sh
docker-compose exec postgres psql
```

## S3

### Provided by Amazon

Create the bucket with:
- _Object Ownership: ACLs enabled_
- all _Block public access_ settings off

Add this CORS configuration (bucket --> _Permissions_ tab --> _CORS_ at the bottom), replacing with the correct Origin:
```json
[
  {
    "AllowedMethods": ["GET", "HEAD"],
    "AllowedOrigins": ["https://django3-stg.do.magnet.cl"]
  }
]
```

And create an IAM user with this policy:
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": "s3:*",
      "Resource": [
        "arn:aws:s3:::bucket-name",
        "arn:aws:s3:::bucket-name/*"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```
It gives access to `bucket-name` only.

### Provided by DigitalOcean

Note that **credentials give access to all the spaces in the account**
[¹](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/questions/spaces-different-keys-per-bucket)
[²](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/questions/when-if-ever-will-spaces-support-individual-access-keys)
[³](https://ideas.digitalocean.com/storage/p/access-key-per-space),
so create a dedicated account for the project, so only staging and production share credentials.

Create the space in the cloud console. Take note of the space name and region, to set them when `deploy.sh` is run.

In the settings of the space in the cloud console, in _CORS Configurations_ click _Add_. Add the server's url and allow `GET` and `HEAD`.

Then in _API_, in _Spaces access keys_ click _Generate New Key_. Take note of the key and its secret.

## Logs

If you are not familiar with docker-compose:
- Run `docker-compose logs django` to see the output of the `django` container
- Add `-f` after `logs` to wait for new messages
- Add `-t` after `logs` if you want extra timestamps

### Cron logs

Running `docker-compose logs ofelia` gives you the output of the `runcrons` management command, which is usually nothing. The logs are in `www.example.com/admin/django_cron/cronjoblog/`

TODO: replace previous paragraph if an alternative to django-cron is installed, or remove this note when django-cron is installed.

## Troubleshooting

### `psql` fails with local postgres

If the database name is wrong or there are problems with PG* env vars, `docker-compose exec postgres psql` can fail with _database "something" does not exist_, _password authentication failed for user "postgres"_, etc.

In this case, you can override the variables and access with local trust by running:
```sh
docker-compose exec postgres su - postgres -c psql
```

Commit message:

docs: document how to backup nginx volume when redeploying

ansible/Readme.md, after:

## Deploy

The target server has to:
- be running Ubuntu 20.04
- have Docker installed
- be present in `inventory.yml`

To deploy for the first time, run:
```sh
ansible/deploy.sh dev
```
where `dev` is the name of the host in inventory.

> Note: the scripts and playbooks were designed for a single host only. Using a pattern like `dev,stg` will probably fail. (It's possible to implement a check with `ansible_play_hosts|length`)

For faster deployments after the first one, you may use:
```sh
ansible/update.sh dev
```

Containers will be recreated if their image is updated, or "when their configuration differs from the service definition". So if there have been changes to .env files, or bind-mounted configuration files, run `deploy/update.sh -r ...` to load changes.

To upgrade unversioned dependencies, for example apt packages, instead of running _update && upgrade_ inside the container, rebuild the images ignoring cache, by running `update.sh` with `-c`.

## Database backups

The database is automatically backed up by update.sh/deploy.sh when `git pull` changes commit.

> Warning: if `git pull` changed commit, and then the backup fails because of misconfiguration, the next attempt to update.sh will not back up because there will be no commit change.

You can manually backup with
```sh
ansible/backup-db.sh dev
```
where `dev` is the name of the host in inventory.

## Importing the DB of a server

```sh
ansible/import-db.sh stg
```
where `stg` is the name of the host in inventory.

This will create a new dump in the server, then download and restore it.

You can also append the file name of the dump, for example:
```sh
ansible/import-db.sh stg stg-2022-02-18_17-10-00.dump
```
which won't create a new dump, and just download the existing one if it's not present in your computer, and then restore it. This makes the process faster and more reproducible, as developers can work on the same dump by running the same `import-db` command.

## External database

Create the database instance before running deploy. The database (as in `database-name`) has to be manually created.

  - AWS RDS: At the _Create database_ wizard, under _Additional configuration_ specify _Initial database name_.

  - DigitalOcean databases: After it's created, instead of using the `defaultdb`, go to the _Users & Databases_ tab in the resource page, and create another one with a better name.

    **Also create a `postgres` DB**, else `dropdb`/`createdb` will fail. (This is because DO doesn't give us the password for the postgres user, which is the owner of the template0/1 databases. However a `postgres` database solves this.)

The `postgres` container in docker-compose.yml has to be kept. It has a custom entrypoint to avoid running another postgres server and creating another database in this case. With its env vars, commands like `pg_dump` automatically target the remote DB.

So you can run queries on this remote DB running this command from server:
```sh
docker-compose exec postgres psql
```

## S3

### Provided by Amazon

Create the bucket with:
- _Object Ownership: ACLs enabled_
- all _Block public access_ settings off

Add this CORS configuration (bucket --> _Permissions_ tab --> _CORS_ at the bottom), replacing with the correct Origin:
```json
[
  {
    "AllowedMethods": ["GET", "HEAD"],
    "AllowedOrigins": ["https://django3-stg.do.magnet.cl"]
  }
]
```

And create an IAM user with this policy:
```json
{
  "Version": "2012-10-17",
  "Statement": [
    {
      "Effect": "Allow",
      "Action": "s3:*",
      "Resource": [
        "arn:aws:s3:::bucket-name",
        "arn:aws:s3:::bucket-name/*"
      ]
    }
  ]
}
```
It gives access to `bucket-name` only.

### Provided by DigitalOcean

Note that **credentials give access to all the spaces in the account**
[¹](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/questions/spaces-different-keys-per-bucket)
[²](https://www.digitalocean.com/community/questions/when-if-ever-will-spaces-support-individual-access-keys)
[³](https://ideas.digitalocean.com/storage/p/access-key-per-space),
so create a dedicated account for the project, so only staging and production share credentials.

Create the space in the cloud console. Take note of the space name and region, to set them when `deploy.sh` is run.

In the settings of the space in the cloud console, in _CORS Configurations_ click _Add_. Add the server's url and allow `GET` and `HEAD`.

Then in _API_, in _Spaces access keys_ click _Generate New Key_. Take note of the key and its secret.

## Logs

If you are not familiar with docker-compose:
- Run `docker-compose logs django` to see the output of the `django` container
- Add `-f` after `logs` to wait for new messages
- Add `-t` after `logs` if you want extra timestamps

### Cron logs

Running `docker-compose logs ofelia` gives you the output of the `runcrons` management command, which is usually nothing. The logs are in `www.example.com/admin/django_cron/cronjoblog/`

TODO: replace previous paragraph if an alternative to django-cron is installed, or remove this note when django-cron is installed.

## How to erase the deployed project from server

The simple way is to remove containers and delete files:
```sh
cd project-name-placeholder
docker-compose down
cd ..
sudo rm -rf project-name-placeholder
```

However if you want to re-deploy (for example to try changes in a playground server), it will take long to generate new DH params for nginx, and even worse, you may run into letsencrypt's [rate limits](https://letsencrypt.org/docs/rate-limits/) which could affect all *.magnet.cl.

So, to backup nginx's volume and use it for the newly deployed instance:
```sh
cd project-name-placeholder
docker-compose down
cd ..
sudo mv project-name-placeholder/docker/volumes/nginx_secrets .
sudo rm -rf project-name-placeholder

# Now from your local computer, deploy with "ansible/deploy.sh target".
# When the script asks for env vars, the git repository has already been cloned,
# so before entering env vars, run:
sudo mv nginx_secrets project-name-placeholder/docker/volumes/
```

## Troubleshooting

### `psql` fails with local postgres

If the database name is wrong or there are problems with PG* env vars, `docker-compose exec postgres psql` can fail with _database "something" does not exist_, _password authentication failed for user "postgres"_, etc.

In this case, you can override the variables and access with local trust by running:
```sh
docker-compose exec postgres su - postgres -c psql
```
