# Documenting before programming using RFC documents

## Context

There are two kinds of documentation:

1. Documentation that is required by the client
2. Documentation that helps us with our operation

The first kind of documentation are things like API Docs, User Manuals, etc., that the client explicitly asks for, and we are contractually mandated to provide. Documentation like this lives in Google Drive and is usually made with tools like Google Docs and Draw.io.

The second kind of documentation lives in the form of modeling and infrastructure diagrams, along with low to medium level explanations of the solutions that were implemented. Currently, this documentation usually resides in the same place as the client facing documentation.

The problem is this kind of documentation is hardly ever updated since it is written or even created in the first place. In this document we propose a way of writing this type of documentation before programming in a way that is agile and easy to maintain.

## Proposed Solution

We propose taking a plain text approach to this type of document, following the example that the open source community gave us in the form of Request for Comment documents, or RFCs for short.

The idea is to document the decisions that were made and the proposed solution along with its infrastructure and modelling, this has a number of advantages:

1. Writing the solution will make it easier to detect problems with it.
2. Having a history of the big decisions that were made in the project facilitates the change of devs within the team.
3. Having a history of the big decisions decreases bus factor of the initial team.

The RFCs should have the following structure:

```markdown
# Title

## Context

Context of the problem to solve.

## Proposed Solution

Explanation of the solution to be implemented.

### Infrastructure

Infrastructure diagram and explanation.

### Modelling

Model diagrams and explanation.
```

The structure can, and should be change over time, as we discover more things that we find necessary to document.

Sometimes certain changes will not affect the infrastructure or modelling of a project, in which case the title will be still include these sections, but with a `(Does not apply)` mark, that way we explicitly state that the problem being solved doesn't require infrastructure, or modelling changes. For example:

```markdown
# Title

## Context

Context of the problem to solve.

## Proposed Solution

Explanation of the solution to be implemented.

### Infrastructure (Does not apply)

### Modelling

Model diagrams and explanation.
```

As for when this document should be written we have the following proposal:

1. At the start of a project stage
2. Before starting a big feature

When starting a new stage there should be enough definition as for it to make sense to have a modelling meeting in which its output should be a draft RFC that should be quickly finalized, approved, and then followed for the implementation.

Sometimes after a few stages there isn't enough definition, or changes, to make sense to write an RFC. So it would also make sense to write an RFC before starting a big feature that would take many PRs and weeks of effort.

As a rule of thumb there should be at least one RFC per stage.

Developers should be encouraged to write RFCs when they have to develop big features, and the RFCs should be reviewed by the team so flaws with the proposed solution can be detected and corrected before implementation.

Finally, for the diagrams of the infrastructure and modelling sections we propose the use of PlantUML, we recommend reading the [corresponding RFC](./2023-11-15-PlantUmlRFC.md)

### Infrastructure

If the proposed feature requires a certain infrastructure, it should be defined on a separate section, along with diagrams if necessary.

#### Example diagrams

```plantuml
!include <awslib/AWSCommon>
!include <awslib/AWSSimplified>
!include <awslib/Compute/EC2>
!include <awslib/Compute/EC2Instance>
!include <awslib/Groups/AWSCloud>
!include <awslib/Groups/VPC>
!include <awslib/Groups/AvailabilityZone>
!include <awslib/Groups/PublicSubnet>
!include <awslib/Groups/PrivateSubnet>
!include <awslib/NetworkingContentDelivery/VPCNATGateway>
!include <awslib/NetworkingContentDelivery/VPCInternetGateway>

hide stereotype
skinparam linetype ortho

AWSCloudGroup(cloud) {
  VPCGroup(vpc) {
    VPCInternetGateway(internet_gateway, "Internet gateway", "")

    AvailabilityZoneGroup(az_1, "\tAvailability Zone 1\t") {
      PublicSubnetGroup(az_1_public, "Public subnet") {
        VPCNATGateway(az_1_nat_gateway, "NAT gateway", "") #Transparent
      }
      PrivateSubnetGroup(az_1_private, "Private subnet") {
        EC2Instance(az_1_ec2_1, "Instance", "") #Transparent
      }

      az_1_ec2_1 .u.> az_1_nat_gateway
    }

    AvailabilityZoneGroup(az_2, "\tAvailability Zone 2\t") {
      PublicSubnetGroup(az_2_public, "Public subnet") {
        VPCNATGateway(az_2_nat_gateway, "NAT gateway", "") #Transparent
      }
      PrivateSubnetGroup(az_2_private, "Private subnet") {
        EC2Instance(az_2_ec2_1, "Instance", "") #Transparent
      }

      az_2_ec2_1 .u.> az_2_nat_gateway
    }

    az_2_nat_gateway .[hidden]u.> internet_gateway
    az_1_nat_gateway .[hidden]u.> internet_gateway
  }
}
```

### Modeling

Modeling should describe using diagrams and text how the proposal should be constructed.

#### Example diagrams

```plantuml
class django.db.models.Model {}

class base.mixins.AuditMixin {
  _save_log(user, message, action)
  _save_addition(user, message)
  _save_edition(user, message)
  _save_deletion(user)
}
class base.models.BaseModel {
  created_at: DateTimeField
  updated_at: DateTimeField
  __init__(*args, **kwargs)
  update(skip_save, **kwargs)
  to_dict(fields, exclude, include_m2m)
  to_json(fields, exclude, **kwargs)
  get_full_url()
}

base.mixins.AuditMixin <|-- base.models.BaseModel
django.db.models.Model <|- base.models.BaseModel
```

```plantuml
Alice -> Bob: Authentication Request
Bob --> Alice: Authentication Response

Alice -> Bob: Another authentication Request
Alice <-- Bob: another authentication Response
```
